Sometimes, when facing a troublesome situation, you have to fight fire with fire to make the problem go away.Flash fires are a major problem in hot areas such as California, Australia, and more. They cause immense damages to what’s left of natural forested areas and potentially burn houses as well. However, a method of controlling these flash fires has been invested to quell the flames before they even begin: controlled fires. Controlled fires (also known as prescribed fires) are a method of decreasing flash fires through burning of old trees before they can become more flammable and more unstable (McCaw, 2013, pp. 217-224). By removing older trees, there will be a smaller amount of unstable trees that could potentially cause a flash fire. However, not everyone’s moral compass is the same to agree with such methods. Authors such as Hesiod from Works and Days and Lao Tzu from Dao De Jing have different worldviews that allow them to think in a way that differs from each other. Because Hesiod’s worldview is based on both his personal life and the Gods, his opinions on controlled fires would conflict with each other, but he would eventually condone controlled fires. In contrast, Lao Tzu would not condone controlled fires due to his heavy emphasis on the Dao.
Before talking about these authors, it is evident that a background in controlled fires is necessary. According to a research article, “The impetus for planned use of fire arose from the need to reduce the impact of extensive, high intensity fires on life, property and commercial forest values. Prescribed fire is increasingly recognised as also playing an important role in mitigating undesirable effects of high intensity fires on environmental values including soil, water and biodiversity”(McCaw, 2013, pp. 217-224). McCaw researched the effects of controlled fires on eucalypt forests in Australia and discovered that by burning easily flammable organic matter such as branches, shrubs, and other older organic matter, the chance of a forest fire occurring drastically decreases. McCaw also wrote another research paper on the flammability of organic matter as it ages, where he states, “Rate of spread, flame dimensions, firebrand density and spotting distance in dry eucalypt forest all increase as fuels increase with age since last fire”(McCaw et al., 2012, pp. 170 - 181). By artificially creating a fire in these forests, the instability of older organic matter drops due to more unstable fuels burning earlier than they would usually do so.
There are also many external benefits to controlled fires that include the wildlife in forests that have undergone controlled fires. According to an article, it states “Two key elements of traditional East African pastoralism—controlled fire and livestock grazing with the use of bomas—attracted greater densities of birds and unique species assemblages when compared with the surrounding undisturbed matrix”(Sensenig et al., 2010, pp. 1606-1616). The article tested and proved that because of controlled fires, the bird population increased in population and density. They theorized that the artificially burned forest allowed for these birds to optimize their ability to scavenge for food. Through destruction, more life was capable of thriving in a much safer forest. Another example of wildlife attaining external benefits is bees. An article on the matter of bees in prescribed fire areas states, “We captured significantly more bee individuals and species in emergence traps placed in plots burned annually or biennially than in unburned reference plots”(Wilson et al., 2021, pp. 527-534). Since there were more ground nested bees caught in areas with controlled fires, it is evident that more of these bees exist in areas that have been burned. The article theorizes that this occurs because burning forests allow for more ground to be available for ground bees to occupy and the burning of forests allows for a greater floral diversity. Now that a greater understanding of controlled fires is known, it is now possible to understand Hesiod’s and Lao Tzu’s opinions of controlled fires and they are what they are.
Hesiod’s worldview is based on his view of the gods and his personal life. Allowing for both of these aspects into his worldview allow for contradictions in his opinions to better suit his needs. Knowing about his worldview on other aspects of life will allow for a better understanding of his views of controlled fires. To start off, Hesiod’s morals contradict itself. In the text of Works and Days, Hesiod says, “If a man gets wealth by force of hands or through his lying tongue, as often happens, when greed clouds his mind and shame iis pushed aside by shamelessness, then the gods blot him out and blast his house and soon his wealth deserts him”(Hesiod, Works and Days, pp. 68-69). Hesiod believes that people who get their money in an evil or malicious way will face the gods’ wrath and receive a severe punishment from them. However, in another part of the text, Hesiod says, “When ploughing-time arrives, make haste to plough, you and your slaves alike, on rainy days and dry ones, while the season lasts(Hesiod, Works and Days, 73). Hesiod believes that the Gods will punish those who attain their living through nefarious and devious means, but Hesiod also condones the use of slaves. Hesiod is capable of defining who are bad and malicious people, but cannot see the fact that he himself is malicious for having slaves tend to his farmland.
Now that it is known how Hesiod contradicts himself through his worldview of the Gods and his personal views, looking into his personal opinion of controlled fires will become easier to understand. Unlike most other properties of the world, fire is considered to belong to the human race rather than the gods according to Hesiod. According to Works and Day, Hesiod states, “The brave son of Iapetos deceived him, and he stole the ray, far-seeing, of unwearied fire, hid in the hollow fennel stalk, and Zeus who thunders in the heavens ate his heart, and raged within to see the ray of fire far-seeing, among men(Hesiod, Works and Days, 41). Prometheus (son of Iapetos) gave the gift of fire to humans without Zeus’s permission and Zeus punished mankind by giving them women. Because fire belongs to humans, Hesiod sees fire as something humans can do whatever they want with. This means that Hesiod would believe that he would be able to utilize controlled fires to prevent flash fires. However, his view of the gods may prevent him from doing so. In the text, Hesiod says, “Make prayers to Zeus the farmer’s god and to Holy Demeter, for her sacred grain, to make it ripe and heavy…  (Hesiod, Works and Days, 73). Hesiod believes that certain gods hold domain over certain natural things in nature. If Hesiod believes in the god of the forest, he may be hesitant to burn down the forests as this would send a message to this god saying that Hesiod is okay with encroaching on the god’s land. However, he has also shown in the past that he is okay with the deconstruction of forests to obtain wood for his personal use. In the text, Hesiod says “The tree you cut at this time, when it sheds its leaves and stops sprouting will be most free of wormholes. Now the time for cutting timber has arrived(Hesiod, Works and Days, p. 72). Hesiod already has predisposed experience with cutting down trees to use as a resource, so he may be okay with controlled fires as a way to save more trees than he destroys.
Despite Hesiod’s conflicting views on forest fires, if forced to choose to be for or against controlled fires, he would most likely be for controlled fires. This is because as mentioned before, Hesiod believes fire belongs to humans and they can do with it as they please. Also, even though Hesiod feels that a certain god may hold domain over the forest, that has not stopped him from cutting down trees in the forest to use as a resource, which indicates that he would be okay with controlled fires as long as he knows that doing so would save more trees than he would destroy.
Lao Tzu’s worldview is based on his beliefs of the Dao, which are specific enough to suggest that his views of the world are concrete. For his views to be concrete, multiple instances of his principles must be visible throughout the Tao Te Jing. Lao Tzu believes that having too many valuables is bad for society and goes against the ideal of the Dao. In the text, Lao Tzu says, “To be overbearing when one has wealth and position is to bring calamity upon oneself. To retire when the task is accomplished is the way of heaven”(Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 13). Lao Tzu believes that wealth leads to people becoming overbearing, which then results in calamity upon oneself. By stopping once a person has made ends meet, the person will be better off than if they had continued for more money. Lao Tzu also denounced having too much money because it brings about the concept of bandits. In the text, Lao Tzu says, “Exterminate ingenuity, discard profit, and there will be no more thieves and bandits” (Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 23). Lao Tzu believes that if everyone did not put a heavy emphasis on money, bandits would not exist in the world. Despite these two quotes being in two separate chapters of the Tao Te Ching, Lao Tzu remains vigilant on his view of money rather than contradicting himself. Another principle Lao Tzu remains stout on is his views of how a government should impose itself onto its people. In the text Hesiod says, “Wherever takes the empire and wishes to do anything to it I see will have no respite. The empire is a sacred vessel and nothing should be done to it” (Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 34). Lao Tzu believes that the government is fine as it is and should not be changed due to it being a “sacred vessel”. The idea of a hands off government is also shown when Lao Tzu says, “The best of all rulers is but a shadowy presence to his subjects… when the task is accomplished and his work is done the people all say, ‘It happened to us naturally’”(Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 21). Lao Tzu praises rulers who do not show their governmental presence to the point where the citizens themselves do not realize they are being governed. The consistency in Lao Tzu's views of how the government should operate further indicates Lao Tzu’s concrete views. Because of Lao Tzu’s unwavering views, it is evident that he will have a definitive view of controlled fires and there will be multiple mentions throughout his works that will show this view.
Lao Tzu would not condone the concept of controlled fires due to its contradictions to the way of the Dao. To start off, Lao Tzu would not condone controlled fires because doing so would ruin the potential that the trees possess. In the text, Hesiod says, “... he who was well versed in the way, was… thick like the uncarved block” (Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 19). Hesiod believes that everything that follows the way must be “thick like an uncarved block”, meaning that it must not be touched. By burning down trees using controlled fire methods, the potential of the three dies off with it, which Lao Tzu would not allow. Another reason Lao Tzu would not condone the use of controlled fires is because he highly reveres nature that helps humans without interfering with them. In the text, Lao Tzu says, “Highest good is like water. Because water excels in benefiting the myriad creatures without contending with them and settles where none would like to be, it comes close to the way”(Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching, 12). Lao Tzu believes that water closely follows the way because it benefits humans without interfering with them. Similarly, trees can be seen as helpful to humans because of the fruits they bear for them. The trees provide humans with nutrients without asking for anything in return. If someone were to burn trees, Lao Tzu would see this as hurting trees despite all the good they bring us and would not condone this action.
Hesiod has a conflicting worldview due to his worldview being composed of the gods and his personal life, but would inevitably agree with controlled fires. In contrast, Lao Tzu’s heavy emphasis on the Dao would prevent him from allowing controlled fires to occur. Hesiod would allow for controlled fires to occur because he would see it as an opportunity to capitalize on the trees that have not been burned down. In contrast, Lao Tzu would not allow controlled fires to occur because they ruin the potential of trees as well as destroy nature that acts selfless towards humans through the trees’ gift of fruits to humans. Hesiod and Lao Tzu may have contradictory opinions of controlled fires, but their contributions to the question help to unravel the good and bad aspects of controlled fires.
